Elective procedures coming back? Here’s how health systems can recapture volumes

In many communities across the country, COVID-19 cases are on the wane. Some states have taken the first tentative steps toward re-opening their economies, and some health systems who stopped offering non-essential services have begun to offer them again. 

On the road to recapturing elective procedure volumes, however, health systems face two serious obstacles:

1) The outbreak is slowing, but COVID-19 remains a constant presence in consumers’ minds. Would-be patients might hesitate to make a new surgical appointment if they fear contracting the virus at the medical facility. 

2) In the era of social distancing, health systems have far fewer points of contact with their patients, which means they have fewer channels available to engage and attract.

Health systems will have to grapple with both of these issues in their bids to earn elective volumes. To help, here are some tactics healthcare leaders might consider. 

Addressing present fear of COVID-19

According to NRC Health’s research, more than 60% of US healthcare consumers believe that visiting any provider presents an elevated risk for contracting the coronavirus. That’s not likely to change any time soon, and these consumers are fearful of visiting a primary care provider — let alone going under a surgeon’s knife.

In the face of these understandable anxieties, how can health systems reassure communities that their facilities are safe?

Two tactics are essential. 

A concerted communications effort will be an important first step. Organizations should share the special measures they’ve taken to ensure a safe, orderly, and hygienic environment at their facilities. 

NRC’s research shows that the delivery of these messages may be nearly as important as the content. A scatter-shot approach to communication may not bring health systems to their desired results. Instead, a data-based investigation of consumer communication preferences should help health systems hone their strategies. Look to consumers data resources like NRC Health’s Market Insights for answers on appropriate messaging content, modality, and frequency.

This, however, is only a preliminary measure. Communicating a facility’s safety practices might be reassuring, but that may not be enough to motivate behavior change. For that, consumers will want to hear from other consumers.

Publishing verified patient ratings (with, for example, NRC Health’s Transparency solution) can help. According to NRC Health’s data, 94.4% of consumers rely on ratings and reviews from other consumers to guide their healthcare decisions. Health systems who regularly publish these reviews, then, will be at a significant advantage over competitors who do not.

Recency of ratings and reviews will prove essential. Potential patients want to see up-to-date comments in order for to get an accurate picture of the state of care.  66.1% of consumers believe that reviews older than 18-months should not be trusted. Recent, first-hand testimonials from verified patients are as much, if not more, persuasive than internally managed communications efforts. 


A starker competitive landscape

The coronavirus has subdued many arenas of the economy. But for health systems, a narrowed market (by necessity) has created revenue strain due to significantly reduced patient volumes. Once the worst of COVID-19 has passed, provider competition for volumes will be fast and fierce. 

At the same time, organizations now have fewer tools with which to compete. Social distancing protocols have drastically reduced points of contact with their customers. How can an organization differentiate their services, in a world of consumer uncertainty and social isolation?

Health systems should maximize the benefits from the one domain that the coronavirus hasn’t diminished: online search. 

Search Engine Optimization (SEO), an important consideration before the pandemic, should rise to the top of providers’ marketing priorities. In a time when consumers are almost exclusively turning to the internet for guidance, organizations must ensure that they stake a prominent and authoritative place in consumers’ online search habits.

Publishing patient comments are an essential part of getting top billing on search-engine results pages. More than 80% of all web searches happen through Google, and Google’s priorities are to serve searchers with fresh, relevant content. By publishing patient comments, health systems effectively enlist patients as content writers, giving them a constant stream of hyper-relevant material to post on their page. Exactly the kind of content that Google rewards and consumers seek.

OrthoNebraska, a surgical provider in the Omaha area, discovered this firsthand. Publishing patient comments through NRC Health’s Transparency solution had a tremendous impact on the organization’s SEO — and, consequently, on traffic on their own domains. Unique visitors to their sites increased by 21% in just six months, and online appointment booking by more than 49% in the same period. 

In the post-coronavirus market environment, one dominated by digital, every organization should invest in improving organic SEO. 


Smart steps after COVID

This pandemic has sharpened the need for a refined approach to recapturing elective volumes. Organizations cannot afford wasted steps in a post-COVID marketplace — the margin for error will be perilously thin. But a smart strategy, informed by robust data and grounded in open communication, will carry the day with consumers. 


